the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
next handout thermodynamics yes yes I
love thermodynamics all right so what is
thermodynamics so thermodynamics and
kinetics I feel go together but for kind
of weird reasons we do thermodynamics
now and we do kinetics at the very last
unit of the semester part of the reason
for this is that kinetics is often a
unit that students can pick up really
fast and so I like doing it at the end
when everything your world is sort of
crazy and you have something that you
can get a grasp on pretty pretty easily
for the last unit so anyway I'll tell
you a little bit about kinetics now
because we won't get to a lot of it
until later so thermodynamics deals with
energy change and spontaneity of
reactions and thermodynamics brings you
three of my favourite things in
chemistry which are Delta H Delta s and
Delta J I love these I live my life
around these things I believe entropy
should always be increasing and I love
nothing more than free energy that's
great stuff ok so today we're gonna talk
about Delta H next week we have Delta s
and Delta G what about kinetics what
does kinetics bring us well kinetics
brings us the rate or speed of a
reaction it can bring us fast reactions
and it can bring us
reactions I like kinetics - I kind of
like the fast to be honest with you
all right so thermodynamics and kinetics
one thermodynamics tells us whether
something is going to happen
spontaneously or not but kinetics tells
us the rate at which it happens so let's
just think of an example for a minute
you may have heard the camera this
commercial happens a lot around
Valentine's Day diamonds are forever
so actually thermodynamically graphite
is favorable to diamonds it's more
stable so graphite or or a cold
thermodynamically this is the stuff
diamonds diamonds not you know forever
that's really a kinetic statement it's
it's there for a very long time but you
know it isn't it isn't a nerd so here's
an important question what is the best
ring for one geek to give another geek
the thermodynamically stable one or one
that that is a you know more kinetically
slow to react more stable more inert
inertness reaction what do you you know
I should have a clicker question on this
and own know what you think but actually
the answer is in my opinion neither of
these
come on there's only really one ring
that any geek really wants Green
Lantern's ring has the power of
chemistry at your fingertips you can
make who cares - something's inert if
you're the Green Lantern you can do
whatever so that that's the ring anyway
oh one ring yeah I like the Green
Lantern ring but I guess you know next
next yeah we maybe we should have we
should open a blog on this it's a really
important question all right so let's
think about bonding for a minute so
thermodynamics is telling us about
energy change is telling us about
spontaneity and so we need to think
about energy that's going in so kinetics
is telling us about how fast
thermodynamics is really telling us
about stability how stable is something
how much does it cost to break it apart
so we're back to bond dissociation
energies we have the change in the
dissociation energy e to the little D
that's the energy to break a bond we've
seen this plot before now we have
methane we're breaking off a hydrogen
from it which is actually very hard to
do scientists would love to break apart
methane and make methanol but it's a
hard thing to do up here we have
unfavorable reactions when the atoms are
too close then you have a sweet spot
where the positions of the atoms are
just right to form a bond that's when
you get methane and then if you put in
energy you can pull that pull this off
if they go far apart with radius this
way your bond will dissociate joeys have
to put energy in to get it to dissociate
so now we can think about it we've
thought about this in terms of bond
dissociation we've seen this before but
now we can think about it in terms of a
new term which is Delta HB or bond
enthalpy so bond enthalpy is the change
in heat accompanying this association of
a bond and that's measured at a constant
pressure in fact if we relate Delta H to
Delta e
delta H equals Delta e plus whatever
change in pressure volume and often this
term is pretty small so people often
really think about reactions in terms of
these being pretty similar to each other
so for gases the difference really is
one to two percent and if you're talking
about a liquid or Sall solid it's really
a negligible difference so we often
really kind of think about these things
in the same way we think about the
energy going into a system to break the
bond or we think about the bond
enthalpies and bond enthalpies Delta H
is often easier to measure so it's very
convenient alright so again bond
enthalpies you always have to put energy
in if you're gonna break a bond so it's
always going to be positive it always
takes heat it always takes something to
break a bond and so breaking a bond is
endothermic heat must be added whereas
bond formation is exothermic heat is
being released and so we can think about
this again when you form a bond those
that we saw with Mo theory that those
bonds those there's more electrons and
lower energy in the bonding orbitals
than in the antibonding orbitals they're
happy this is a lower energy state so if
you're gonna break that bond breaking up
is hard to do and there's a song that
verifies that statement breaking up is
hard to do you always have to had heat
but when you go when you go from that
stable state out when you form those
bonds you know that's that everyone it's
like you know come a married couple
often get a little boring they're in a
low energy states hard to get them out
of the house and so they release all of
their their energy and they form this
nice little happy stable couple so when
you do bond formation
that's an exothermic process all right
so we can talk about standard bond
enthalpies when you see this little
circle up there that means it's a value
that's at standard conditions where
you're react
some products are in their standard
states and so we can think about what
are some Delta H or some bond enthalpies
for different kinds of carbon hydrogen
bonds so here's our friend methane if
you're gonna pull off a hydrogen you
have to put energy in to do that and the
bond enthalpy for that is 438 now we can
think about some other kinds of carbon
bonds we talked about this one we have
it here in the classroom so we pull off
a hydrogen from that it's plus 410 so
similar but not the same if you now
substitute floorings three fluorines for
three of the hydrogens that changes your
value a little bit but not much
if you substitute chlorine it changes it
a lot more same with bromine so it
depends the bond enthalpy depends on
what else is around that atom that
you're pulling around so it's it's not
always the same value it's different it
depends on what else is there so often
you'll have a table that will report
mean bond enthalpies and they take all
the bond enthalpies and they get the
mean value and they're usually within
eight percent of each other and for a
carbon hydrogen bond it's around 412 is
the mean bond enthalpy but when you're
using mean bond enthalpies to calculate
something you have to realize that there
can be some you know pretty big
differences depending on what's around
that bond that you're gonna break
alright so those are some bond
enthalpies why are they important well
they're important because the difference
in bond enthalpies between a product and
a reactant can tell you about the
enthalpy of that reaction the enthalpy
of the reaction of breaking a bonds and
forming new bonds or the enthalpy of
reaction which is Delta H R sub R and
that is and then in the standard state
in that case so let's talk about
enthalpies of reactions so we have this
symbol again standard bond enthalpy
for a reaction so if it's a little B
it's a bond enthalpy if it's a little R
it's a reaction enthalpy if it's
negative value it means it's an
exothermic reaction and if it's a
positive value it means that it's an
endothermic reaction so we'll use these
terms a lot and you'll get very familiar
with them so let's look at some examples
of reactions and here is one of my
favorites and it is yes it has its own
song
idea unfortunately every time you will
hear the word photosynthesis you'll go
ah it happens I'm sorry about that
okay so photosynthesis amazing reaction
people right now are trying to duplicate
it in industry to solve the energy
problem good luck with that but I know I
I wish them good luck that would be
awesome we use the opposite of that
reaction for our energy so we take sugar
and use oxygen to break it down which is
an awesome thing because this has a
really negative enthalpy of reaction
minus two eight one six kilojoules per
mole it's huge and we store this in
something called ATP so since this is
and I'm going to need the help of the
TAS for a minute so we're gonna do a
very quick demo at the end of today's
class this reaction is is exothermic
big-time it's a big negative which
raises the question you know if it's
that exothermic really big value we have
sugar in air why we should feel heat
heat should be released so I think we
should do this demo now and see whether
that's true so I have a bag of sugar and
it is filled under nitrogen so there's
no oxygen in there and I forgot my
safety glasses but you know I'll try to
you know the sorry about the front room
I should have had a cellar announcement
that you might want to sit back but I'm
gonna cut this open and let o 2 in so
there should be a lot of heat coming out
oh you know what they're individually
wrapped all right so this is not gonna
work so I need my the TAS to come down
here please and you got to help me
unwrap them has anyone done the
experiment yet do you feel heat coming
out you do all right I better try it up
here let's say I'm in a run wrap mine
it's not working very well so it turns
out that it's very its heat should be
released but this is very slow so we
don't feel the heat when we unwrap our
Hershey's Kisses I encourage everyone to
try this experiment at least once but
the way that we harness this energy in
our bodies is that we have catalysts
which are enzymes that speed up the
reaction and that's how we get the full
force of this reaction out so that is
actually our introduction to
thermodynamics and next time we're going
to talk about how we're going to
calculate these Delta H are these heats
of reaction all right so we were talking
about Delta H and so I want to pull out
the handouts from last time and we were
at the bottom of page two with three
different ways to calculate Delta H so
our Delta H of reaction Delta H are the
reaction enthalpy so I introduced you to
bond enthalpies and today we're going to
look at how you use bond enthalpies to
calculate reaction enthalpies and
remember bond enthalpies sometimes it
has nothing just Delta H sometimes it's
Delta H sub B capital B for bond and
we're gonna look at that
then we're going to look at how you can
calculate Delta H for reaction from the
standard enthalpies of formation and
I'll introduce you to what that means
and then also tell you about Hess's law
where you can combine reactions known
reactions that have known Delta H's to
get a new equation and calculate a new
Delta H for that reaction so three
different ways so we're gonna start with
way one which is bond enthalpies so here
is the equation for calculating bond
enthalpies so we have the Delta H nought
of of the reaction equals the sum of all
of the reactants bond enthalpies minus
the sum of all the product bond
enthalpies and so this is bonds broken
minus bonds formed and so let's think
about this for a minute and think about
what would be true if you had stronger
bonds in the products than in the
reactants what would be true and this is
a clicker question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
okay yep so now let's think about why
this is true
so it's good good news that most of you
know that negative means exothermic and
positive means endothermic and let's
look at why this is true so so let's
let's look at both of these so if we
have bonds stronger in the products you
can just think about the equation so if
you have bonds stronger in the products
this is a bigger number and that's a
smaller number which is going to give
you a negative answer and a negative
value is exothermic and you can think
about the equation stronger bonds here
bigger number minus the smaller number
positive or endothermic but let's think
for a minute about why this is the case
and rationalize it because on an exam
this is one of the equations that you're
not given so let's let's help you
remember why this would be true
so we can think about we can think about
this if you're if you're going to break
bonds and this isn't in your notes but
I'm just people get confused by this so
I'm just gonna write a little bit on the
board so if you're gonna break bonds you
need to put energy into the system to
break bonds and we talked about this
before and since we have exam two coming
up we'll just do a little review of some
of the things that might be on the exam
so you don't have this in in the handout
we're doing right now but you had this
in the lecture nine handout and
something like this might be on the exam
so we should should be thinking about it
so remember if there is no energy that
you needed to put in to break a bond if
breaking the bond required no energy
there would be no bond so when the
energy is zero
there's no bonds these two are not these
things are not bonded together and when
you do form a bond to go down in energy
here so it's at a lower state it's more
stable that's why it forms a bond if it
was less stable it wouldn't be forming a
bond but if it's more stable lower in
energy a larger negative number then
then a bond forms so to break this bond
you have to put
energy into the system so breaking bonds
always involves energy in but forming
bonds so if we're forming bonds then
we're gonna have energy out so we're at
a we're at a lower place here so if we
if if we want to break bonds we have to
put energy in but if we're forming bonds
then we're going to have energy that
these guys had that is going to be
released somewhere so energy goes out of
the system and the farther down we have
the stronger bonds the more energy you
have to put in to break but also the
more energy that comes out when when the
bonds form so energy in to break a bond
but when a bond is forming it goes too
low up to a lower state and that energy
is released so now we can think about
what happens if you have a reactant with
weak bonds so if the reactant then has
weak bonds how much energy do you have
to put in if it has weak bonds to break
them not a lot so we have just sort of a
little bit of energy in little energy in
to break those bonds now in the products
if we have strong bonds how much energy
goes out if we're forming strong bonds a
lot so energy out we have lots of energy
out so that was the first case that we
had so we had something where the bonds
were stronger in the product and we said
that this was negative so net here we
have heat or energy out is released and
so that's an exothermic
dumb who the board's work today and if
we have the other if we have say strong
bonds in the prop in the reactance then
we have to put a lot of energy in big
energy in and if we have weak bonds that
are being formed we're not getting much
energy back so the net here is that you
have heat in or heat absorbed and it's
an endothermic reaction so this is just
one way to think about it remember
whenever you're gonna break bond you
always have to put energy in to break
the bond and when a brand is formed that
energy is released
so we're thinking about the net of these
processes and that's why this equation
works for us so keep this in mind this
is one of the points that people get
confused on on the exams and sometimes
like they say Oh thermodynamics I just
don't understand it and they're not
keeping calm and sciencing on they're
getting all stressed by thermodynamics
and all it's only this confusion that's
it
so if you work this out then
thermodynamics will be your friend and
you will love thermodynamics like I do
forever so this is this is a it's it's
just kind of keep this in mind and those
diagrams in mind and you'll be all good
all right so let's do an example now so
we can we can use these bond enthalpies
in this equation where we're summing up
all our reactants and sometimes you see
some four of a little I here for I
reactants minus J products so the sum of
all of the products and and it really is
a lot here because we're talking about
breaking every bond we're talking about
forming every bond so this is not a huge
molecule but let's think about how many
bonds were actually gonna be breaking
here so these are all the bonds that are
broken they're not quite as many being
formed
so bonds broken we have carbon hydrogen
bonds and we have seven of those so one
two three four five let's see if I count
them one two three four five six or
seven there it is
I need my my glasses all right Oh H
bonds we have these guys up here 1 2 3 4
5 we have Co bond over a 1 double bond
over here so we also are going to have
these ones here 1 2 3 4 5 we have the
double bond over there we have 5 sorry 5
carbon bonds the 1 single bond here and
the carbon bonds 1 2 3 4 5 and we have
OO bonds we have six of those thank
goodness I didn't have to count anymore
it's already labeled and then the bonds
formed so we're gonna have these so it's
six of those so we have 12 altogether
and we have also 12 over here so first
you have to count and counting is not
one of my strengths so I don't like
doing it this way and I'm going to show
you two other ways to calculate the same
thing but we can take this and sum these
all up we can look up the mean bond
enthalpies for every single one of these
types of bonds multiply them by the
appropriate coefficients and come up
with a sum for all the bonds for I
number of bonds that you have and the
reactants and you can do the same and
the products for J number of bonds that
you have in the products and come up
with these numbers so if you were told
that you have to do it this way use bond
enthalpies and you know how to do it or
if it's an easier problem you're only
saved breaking two things and forming
two things this isn't a bad way to do it
for big molecules this is definitely a
nuisance and if we sum all of this up
together and so for the total number we
have reactants minus products and so if
we subtract this we get minus 2,740 and
the actual value is minus 200 2,816 so
it's not even the best agreement when
you do it this way and the reason was if
you remember last time we were talking
about the bonds and mean bond enthalpy
is about 8% different so if you had say
CH in a system that has all their all
the rest of the atoms on carbon or H
that's a somewhat different value than
if all of those other H atoms were
substituted with bromine or if all those
other H atoms were substituted with
carbon then the bond enthalpy for that
CH it depends on what else is bonded to
the C and so there's about 8 percent
difference usually in the values and so
overall you're not going to get much
better you certainly are not going to
get better than 8 so agreement a 3
percent is pretty good but it's not all
that precise because we're using these
mean bond enthalpies which don't depend
on the actual value in that particular
system so we can do better than this and
it can be also easier and it'll be
easier if we use standard heats of
formation
so this is Delta H sub F F for formation
so the Delta H sub F naught for standard
value is equal to the reaction Delta H
if you're talking about a reaction that
involves 1 mole of compound being
derived from its pure elements in their
most stable state and in their standard
state so this is standard state 1 bar
and room temperature all right so let's
calculate the same for the same reaction
glucose pisaq Siachen going to CO 2 plus
water and see if we can get a little bit
more accurate value that way so let's
think about what's happening in this
reaction so every time we oxidize
glucose were forming water and so we can
think about the heat of formation for
liquid water so again this would be 1
mol coming from
fewer elements in their most standard
state so we have to think about where
the hydrogen's coming from and where the
oxygens coming from
so hydrogen in its most stable form is
h2 gas an oxygen in its most stable form
is o2 gas and so that's then the
equation balanced for one mole of h2o
liquid being formed and we can look up
the the Delta Delta H for this that
Delta H of formation for this reaction
as written is the Delta H of formation
and it's minus two hundred and eighty
five point eight three kilojoules per
mole so now let's consider what else
we're forming water and we're also
forming co2 so co2 is derived from
carbon in its most stable state which is
graphite as we discussed before and also
Oh to oxygen and o2 oxygen gas is the
most stable state there so for this
reaction as written that is the Delta H
of formation of co2 gas and it's minus
three hundred and ninety three point
five kilojoules per mole so those are
our products we also have two reactants
one of our reactants is o2 so it's
what's doing the oxidation and we're
going from Oh - gasps - OH - gasps this
is the most stable State so what do you
think the value is here zero yes so if
you have an element already in its most
stable state its heat of formation is
going to be zero because it's already
the most stable state so the heat of
formation is zero and every year I think
on an exam
someone's trying to see if they can
calculate a Delta H of a reaction and
they're looking and they're like oh I
want to use heats of formation cuz I
know that's a lot easier but a value is
missing from my table and they're like
the value is missing from the table and
the tea egg doesn't know how much
information or whatever to give and if
you think you should have a value in
exam you
think about is that element already in
its most standard state perhaps it's
zero and that's why it's not listed on
the table so keep this in mind this can
be very useful to remember alright one
more thing is involved in the equation
we have glucose so we can think about
the reaction that forms glucose from
elements in its most stable state and
we've actually talked about all of these
already we have Oh - that's in its most
stable state carbon graphite h2 gas and
so this reaction is written it has the
heat of formation of minus 1260
kilojoules per mole so now we can
calculate the Delta H for the oxidation
of glucose the Delta H of the reaction
from these Delta H's of formation and
here is the equation Delta H of the
reaction is equal to the sum of all of
the Delta H's of formation of the
products minus the sum of the Delta H's
of formation of the reactants so this
now is one of the sources of confusion
because if you're using bond enthalpies
its reactants minus products if you're
using Delta H of formation its products
minus reactants so that's why I spend a
little time over here thinking about
what's going on with the bond enthalpies
so hopefully no one will fall into this
Delta H pitfall over here and you'll
keep the reactions of the equations
straight ok so now we can plug it in if
you remember the equations this is
pretty easy so we have our Delta H of
reaction we have six times the heat of
formation oops of our products over here
co2 six times the first product and then
six times the second product which is
water - the first reactant which is our
glucose and we have one of those
and we have six oxygens so products
minus reactants pay attention to the
stochiometry you need to multiply the
heats of formation by the number of
molecules so then we can put in the
values without we just saw co2 minus 392
for our water - 285 - and here we have a
minus 1 - 6 0 for glucose and again 6
times 0 because the oxygen is already in
its most stable state and if we do the
math correctly you get minus 2,816
kilojoules per mole and that is exactly
the experimental value and it's because
the heats of formation are also
experimental so this is very precise
number when you use the heats of
formation you're gonna you're gonna get
a much more a much closer value to
experimental and this was a bit easier
than thinking about every bond that
would be broken in every bond that would
be formed ok one more way that you can
do this and this takes advantage of
something known as Hess's law and the
fact that enthalpy is a state function
which means that it's independent a path
so if you were climbing a mountain and
you wanted to go from point A to point B
you could climb all the way up to the
top and go back down or you could just
go right from A to B and it wouldn't
matter your Delta H would be the same in
both cases because it's independent of
path so it only matters what values are
for your reactants and your final
products it doesn't matter how you get
from the reactants to the products Delta
H is going to be the same and because of
this you can take different routes if
there are equations for different parts
of your reaction that are already known
with values of Delta H you can add those
equations together and then add together
the Delta HS to get a new
you so Hess's law if there are two or
more equations are added to give another
chemical equations then you can add up
the Delta H for the reactions of each of
the individual equations to get the sum
for your new equation so let's do this
now again for glucose and oxygen so if
we have these three equations here this
one is showing glucose plus oxygen being
broken down to the elements that are in
the most stable state
so graphite h2 and o2 for glucose and
then our 602 s are there on both sides
because it's already in the most stable
state we're going to be forming co2 from
the elements in the most stable state
and also water so we can add these
together paying attention to the
stochiometry so we need to multiply this
equation by 6 and this equation by 6 and
then we should be able to do some
canceling and make sure that we're
getting our equation of interest so we
can cancel these 602 s with these we can
cancel these o to s with these and we
can cancel this h2 with this and that
leaves us with glucose plus 6 oxygens
going to 6 co2 s + 6 waters so this is
going to work now and now since we added
this together to get this we can add our
Delta H of reactions together to get a
new Delta H of reaction oh sorry I
cancel I forgot to cancel my Graphite's
there we go now we're good didn't notice
them there ok so our Delta H for
reaction we saw before that the
formation of co2 from elements in his
most stable state was - so now we've
just changed the sign because now we're
going the opposite direction so we have
a positive value for that Delta H of
reaction now we have six times the heat
of formation of co2
and six times the heat of formation of
water because that's what those
equations are those are the heat of
formation reactions and if we add this
all together then we get the number that
that we saw before so it doesn't matter
what path we take we're going to get to
that same answer and this one since
we're using information that all has to
do with heat of formation it's not
really very different from the one we
did before but you can use Hess's law
for delta h of reactions that are not
heats of formation if one equation if
equations are available that can be
added or some to get your net reaction
then you can add you can add or subtract
these values to get a new Delta H okay
don't forget kilojoules per mole okay so
we have our three different ways bond
enthalpies heat of formation and Hess's
law